A bunion is a lump of
bone and tissue on the outside
of the joint of the big toe.
It results from abnormal
stress on the joint
over an extended period of time.
The stress causes enlargement
of the first metatarsal,
the bone that joins the big toe.
This is a complex joint,
where bones, tendons, and ligaments
work together to transmit
and distribute your weight during movement.
Wearing tight, high heeled shoes
pushes your body’s weight
onto the front of the foot.
Crowding pressure forces the big toe
toward the smaller toes
and the joint of the big toe outwards.
This outward movement of the joint
starts the formation of a bunion.
With continued stress on the joint,
the bunion becomes larger.
The skin and tissue around the bunion
may become swollen and inflamed,
causing pain and making it difficult to walk.
Conservative treatment for a bunion
includes wearing roomy,
wider toed shoes
and medication to relieve
pain and inflammation.
In severe cases, surgery may be
performed to relieve pain,
remove the enlargement,
and realign the joint.
Depending on the severity,
the surgery may simply
involve removing the extra bone
and realigning the muscles,
tendons, and ligaments of the joint.
In more severe cases,
the bone may need to be cut
and moved into its proper position,
with insertion of screws,
wires, or plates to hold it
together while it heels.
Tendons and ligaments
may also need to be repositioned.
In some cases, an implant
may be required to reconstruct
or replace the joint of the big toe.